---
layout: post
title: Islam and the Left
date: 2024-3-18
description: The Odd Origin of the Left and Its Embrace of Islam
image: /assets/images/islamic-flags.jpg
author: Tyler Thomas
tags: [Islam, politics]
---

Not until the start of the Gaza war was it clear just how much the Western Left
has embrace the Palestinian cause. Why, one wonders, of all the conflicts in the
world, has this become such a reaction point around which so many campuses have
erupted into chaos.  While claim to any cause probably leaves out some factors,
there seems to me just two main threads which lead back to the late '90s and the
politics of the day.

We must all remember the (perceived) power the religious right had over America
at the turn of the century.  The cultural fault lines before 2000 were about
religion in general, with the counter-cultural positions championed by the likes
of Richard Dawkins, Christopher Hitchens, and Sam Harris.  They had carved a
cultural niche by their open anti-religious fervor and their many debates with
the champions faith, all brought streaming to teens with an internet connections
courtesy of YouTube.  It really was the cultural edge, watching Hitchens in your
bedroom while your family all prayed around the dinner table.  It had all the
right resonances for the era; It was avant-garde, it would piss off your
parents, and it flew the middle finger to tradition.  Then 9/11 happened.

Almost all politics are like a magnetic field, whatever one side attracts it is
equally repelled by the other side.  If the current era of politics has taught
us one thing, it is that nothing is sacred, and voters really only ever come to
decide on issues post hoc.  If all issues were put in a bag and pulled out at
random by the parties, the next day a narrative as to why one must champion all
the arbitrary issues of one's side and hate the opposite would seem natural and
right.

After the Twin Towers fell, both the Left and the Right were in natural
alignment to assign blame to Islam, one because they were against religion, and
the other because they were against all un-Christian religion.  But both parties
cannot have concord on anything, so it was for one party to flip.  Would it
first be the left, as all dis-harmonies could be explained away by recourse to
'Respect for culture' and an inherent anti-US bias (even though all the dictates
of Islam were entirely contrary to the morals of campus culture)? Or would it be
the right who would find an accord with Islam as a common faith as it had with
Mormons, and the respect for traditional values (even though the actual tenants
of the respective faith would exclude the other from the post-life paradise)?

Why it was that the Left blinked first I don't claim to have an answer for, but
the result was the Left taking on the cause of Muslims in the US and abroad.
The narrative fit naturally into one of American misdeeds in the Middle East
and 9/11 our just ends.  On the Right, a cottage industry of Anti-Islam
literature exploded and sat right next to the Christian section of any major
book store.  Sharia became a scare word on talk radio and the fight against it
was then also a fight against the Left who became its promoter in the minds of
the Ditto Army.

America and Israel became allies more of chance than principle, a product of the
cold war and a need for alliances in a strategic part of the world.  The
socialist inclinations of Israel from its origins through the '70s were something
overlooked by the US in exchange for Israel keeping its distance from the
Soviets.  A more natural economic alignment would not occur till Menachem Begin
when Israel began to actually become a valuable trade partner at the same moment
the soviet bloc was dissolving into its constituent elements.  Who would then
inherit the issues of the Middle East also fell to America once the Soviets
pulled out of Afghanistan leaving us the only power broker.

In the meantime, religion in the US had had a turn to the prophetic, and the
rantings of John Hagee and his ilk had incorporated the fate of Israel into the
signs and symbols of the Apocalypse.  It was only when the Jews once more
controlled the temple mount that Jesus could come in a flash from the sky and
remake all human relations in his image.  This naturally fit into a preexisting
realpolitik and did not have to wrestle with the contradictions of a communist
Israel in Sunday sermons. And so while it was true that the Jews had killed
Jesus, we still needed to send them US arms and advance their interests in the UN. 

Thus it came to be over-determined that the Left would be all in for Palestine.
It was too easy after the Religious Right had adopted Israel.  It became more
difficult to condemn Christianity while advocating Islam, but like all partisans
everywhere, they managed it just fine.  The cognitive dissonance was kept at bay
by the distance to any actual Islamic country which took its faith seriously,
and instead ended in such spectacles in the West as Queer for Palestine.  While
unsurprising, it is still amazing.

